
#Absolutes and relationships of nutrients in the growing medium

**by Mark Taylor**

**edited by Kevron Rees**

In the growing medium, be it natural soil, a custom mix, or just water, the PH of that medium is critical.  Too high or too low will affect all nutrients in that the nutrients can become insoluble or can be easily leached away and therefore completely unavailable to the plant. The best range in the PH scale for typical crops in your garden is between 5.5 and 6.5. If you are seeing quickly developing deficiencies in the early stages of your plants growth and you know you are feeding them a balanced diet, check the PH of your medium and correct it. There are inexpensive PH kits available and plenty of information on how to correct this problem.

With the growing medium plant ready, the issue now is nutrient availability. All nutrients must be in a specific ionic form for plants. Scientists discovered long ago that specific naturally occurring chemicals found in the soil, organic material, rock formations, and our air are immediately available to plants as food. Knowing which of these were needed for plant growth, they developed ways of extracting those chemicals from rocks and our air. Make no mistake, they are not artificial chemicals, they are converted through chemical synthesis just as all are in nature. Man has simply sped up the extraction process. The Mittleider Method in particular uses these inorganic fertilizers to provide a plant ready form of nutrients that requires little if any subterranean activity to convert it to the perfect ionic elements. It was also found that too much of one element would interfere with the uptake of another or block it completely. Too little of another and the same effect. Scientists were able to develop a nutrient formula that balanced all 13 required nutrients and was well suited for many plants. Most common is some variation of the Hougland solution that was developed in 1938. This formula is viable in any medium without too much concern as to nutrient content that may preexist. Mittleider used the principles of hydroponic nutrition and over the years (as did many others) he experimented as to just how much of the nutrients he could get by with to minimize costs but still get an above average yield. Balanced amounts in the correct form, at the right time are the foundation to successful harvests. 

Today, because many gardeners are practicing a corrupt version of the Mittleider Method we can explore a specific relationship between the required nutrients. Many photos are posted at one MG Group that clearly represent nutrient deficiencies and the resulting loss of time and money as these plants perish. Unfortunately, because the gardeners are not armed with useful information, they shake it off as too much water, too much fertilizer, a disease, its too hot, its too cold, or wildly guessing that maybe it needs some urea or potash. We will use this existing problem to show how just a single imbalance wreaks havoc on the solubility and uptake of other nutrients. Mittleider did have a formula that he broke down into specific weights of nutrients. It was not as simple as adding 25 pounds of 13-13-13 fertilizers to 4 pounds of epsom salt, 10 ounces of micro mix and a preplant mix that includes boron and a form of PH corrective calcium. Perhaps knowing that the added gypsum or lime in the pre plant formula was not a soluble calcium and that it might be months or even years before it became available to plants in the ionic form Ca+2, Mittleider specifically required the use of Calcium Nitrate which contains 19% water soluble calcium. Using simple mixes as suggested these days leaves the “preplant mix”, the “weekly feed”, and the resulting watered down “constant feed” completely void of any usable calcium. Because of very low or a complete lack of soluble Ca in the soil, other vital nutrients become unavailable due to the salts that exist and build up in the soil and on the root structure of plants. Soluble calcium is extremely important not only in photosynthesis, but it acts as a buffer against these salts as it reduces the presence of these nutrient blocking salts on and around the roots. You can bet money on the fact that any success seen with the “revised and edited” version of the Mittleider Method is a direct result of the hit and miss potential that there is soluble calcium in the existing soil and water used to irrigate.

##Editor notes:

Content is identical to original except for a few formatting and spelling corrections.
