{\rtf1\ansi\deff3\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Serif{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Sans{\*\falt Arial};}{\f5\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Microsoft YaHei;}{\f6\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Mangal;}{\f7\fnil\fprq0\fcharset0 Mangal;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;\red29\green33\blue41;}
{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\widctlpar\hyphpar0\aspalpha\ltrpar\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af8\langfe2052\dbch\af6\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang1033 Normal;}
{\s15\sbasedon0\snext16\sb240\sa120\keepn\dbch\af5\dbch\af6\afs28\loch\f4\fs28 Heading;}
{\s16\sbasedon0\snext16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140 Text Body;}
{\s17\sbasedon16\snext17\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\dbch\af7 List;}
{\s18\sbasedon0\snext18\sb120\sa120\noline\i\dbch\af7\afs24\ai\fs24 Caption;}
{\s19\sbasedon0\snext19\noline\dbch\af7 Index;}
}{\*\generator LibreOffice/5.1.3.2$Windows_x86 LibreOffice_project/644e4637d1d8544fd9f56425bd6cec110e49301b}{\info{\creatim\yr2016\mo5\dy21\hr21\min39}{\revtim\yr2016\mo5\dy21\hr21\min59}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}}\deftab709
\viewscale100
{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse451\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\pgdscnxt0 Default Style;}}
\formshade\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\sectd\sbknone\sectunlocked1\pgndec\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
{\*\ftnsep\chftnsep}\pgndec\pard\plain \s16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\sl285\slmult0\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa90{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\ul\ulc0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
Absolutes and relationships of nutrients in the growing medium}
\par \pard\plain \s16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\sl285\slmult0\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb90\sa0{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
In the growing medium, be it natural soil, a custom mix, or just water, the PH of that medium is critical.\line  To high or too low will affect all nutrients in that the nutrients can become insoluble or can be easily leached away and therefore completely unavailable to the plant.\line  The best range in the PH scale for typical crops in your garden is between 5.5 and 6.5. \line  If you are seeing quickly developing deficiencies in the early stages of your plants growth and you know you are feeding them a balanced diet, check the PH of your medium and correct it.\line  There are inexpensive PH kits available and plenty of information on how to correct this problem.\~\line \line With the growing medium plant ready, the issue now is nutrient availability.\line  All nutrients must be in a specific ionic form for plants.\line  Scientists discovered long ago that specific naturally occurring chemicals found in the soil, organic material, rock formations, and our air are immediately available to plants as food.\line  Knowing which of these were needed for plant growth, they developed ways of extracting those chemicals from rocks and our air.\line  Make no mistake, they are not artificial chemicals, they are converted through chemical synthesis just as all are in nature. Man has simply sped up the extraction process.\line  The Mittleider Method in particular uses these inorganic fertilizers to provide a plant ready form of nutrients that requires little if any subterranean activity to convert it to the perfect ionic elements.\line  It was also found that too much of one element, would interfere with the uptake of another or block it completely. Too little of another and the same effect.\line  Scientists were able to develop a nutrient formula that balanced all 13 required nutrients and was well suited for many plants.\line  Most common is some variation of the Hougland solution that was developed in 1938. This formula is viable in any medium without too much concern as to nutrient content that may preexist.\line  Mittleider used the principles of hydroponic nutrition and over the years (as did many others) he experimented as to just how much of the nutrients he could get by with to minimize costs but still get an above average yield.\line  Balanced amounts in the correct form, at the right time are the foundation to successful harvests.\line  Today, because many Gardeners are practicing a corrupt version of the Mittleider Method we can explore a specific relationship between the required nutrients.\line  Many photos are posted at one MG Group that clearly represents nutrient deficiencies and the resulting loss of time and money as these plants perish.\line  Unfortunately, because the Gardeners are not armed with useful information, they shake it off as too much water, too much fertilizer, a disease, its too hot, its too cold, or wildly guessing that maybe it needs some urea or potash.\line  We will use this existing problem to show how just a single imbalance wreaks havoc on the solubility and uptake of other nutrients.\line  Mittleider did have a formula that he broke down into specific weights of nutrients. It was not as simple as adding 25 pounds of 13-13-13 fertilizers to 4 pounds of epsom salt, 10 ounces of micro mix and a preplant mix that includes boron and a form of PH corrective calcium.\line  Perhaps knowing that the added gypsum or lime in the pre plant formula was not a soluble calcium and that it might be months or even years before it became available to plants in the ionic form Ca+2, Mittlieder specifically required the use of Calcium Nitrate which contains 19% water soluble calcium.\line  Using simple mixes as suggested these days leaves the \u8220\'93preplant mix\u8221\'94, the \u8220\'93weekly feed\u8221\'94, and the resulting watered down \u8220\'93constant feed\u8221\'94 completely void of any usable calcium.\line  Because of very low or a complete lack of soluble Ca in the soil, other vital nutrients become unavailable due to the salts that exist and build up in the soil and on the root structure of plants.\line  Soluble calcium is extremely important not only in photosynthesis, but it acts as a buffer against these salts as it reduces the presence of these nutrient blocking salts on and around the roots.\line  You can bet money on the fact that any success seen with the \u8220\'93revised and edited\u8221\'94 version of the Mittleider Method is a direct result of the hit and miss potential that there is soluble calcium in the existing soil and water used to irrigate.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\widctlpar\hyphpar0\aspalpha\ltrpar\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af8\langfe2052\dbch\af6\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang1033\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4

\par }