{\rtf1\ansi\deff3\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Serif{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Sans{\*\falt Arial};}{\f5\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Microsoft YaHei;}{\f6\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Mangal;}{\f7\fnil\fprq0\fcharset0 Mangal;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;\red29\green33\blue41;}
{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\widctlpar\hyphpar0\aspalpha\ltrpar\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af8\langfe2052\dbch\af6\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang1033 Normal;}
{\s15\sbasedon0\snext16\sb240\sa120\keepn\dbch\af5\dbch\af6\afs28\loch\f4\fs28 Heading;}
{\s16\sbasedon0\snext16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140 Text Body;}
{\s17\sbasedon16\snext17\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\dbch\af7 List;}
{\s18\sbasedon0\snext18\sb120\sa120\noline\i\dbch\af7\afs24\ai\fs24 Caption;}
{\s19\sbasedon0\snext19\noline\dbch\af7 Index;}
}{\*\generator LibreOffice/5.1.3.2$Windows_x86 LibreOffice_project/644e4637d1d8544fd9f56425bd6cec110e49301b}{\info{\creatim\yr2016\mo5\dy21\hr15\min50}{\revtim\yr2016\mo5\dy21\hr22\min23}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}}\deftab709
\viewscale100
{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse451\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\pgdscnxt0 Default Style;}}
\formshade\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\sectd\sbknone\sectunlocked1\pgndec\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
{\*\ftnsep\chftnsep}\pgndec\pard\plain \s16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\sl285\slmult0\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa90{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
\line \line \line }{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\ul\ulc0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
Diagnosing nutrient deficiencies in plants}
\par \pard\plain \s16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\sl285\slmult0\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb90\sa90{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
I will start with saying that a truly balanced fertilization program will save you a lot of grief.\line  Healthy plants resist disease just like we do.\line  I imagine you have seen a person that is not well, and every so often you might hear the expression, \u8220\'93you\u8217\'92r}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
e}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
 looking pale\u8221\'94. That is what a deficient plant shows, a change of color.\line  A healthy plant is lush green with leaves and branches reaching upward and outward.\line  In general the bottom of your plants will show the first sign of real problems.\line  It is important to understand the difference between a plants ability to uptake nutrients from it's root system and disperse them throughout the plant and being able to move them once they have been located.\line  Just think location, location, location....translocation.\line  Where the problem began on the plant and it's progression is the key identifying factor as to what is wrong.\line  There are three nutrients that are particular to older leaves at the bottom of your plants.\line  They are Phosphorous, Potassium, and Magnesium.\line  These three nutrients are mobile in plants being that once they are dispersed to areas of the plant, they can be moved from that location.\line  The process of moving these nutrients from one leaf to another is translocation.\line  All three will be removed from a leaf to support new growth at the top.\line  A plant does this because it's intention is to eventually produce seed, so it will sacrifice older growth in an effort to reach maturity.\line  As phosphorous is translocated, it is removed from the edge of the lower leaves inward towards the stem leaving a brown dead look.\line  Potassium is also removed from the edges inward but will leave behind color changes such as purple, reddish, dark green and even black.\line  Same with Magnesium, the removal begins near the tips of the leaves moving toward the stem, leaving a yellow mottled look while the veins stay green.\line  All of the above deficiencies will work their way up the plant branch by branch, leaf by leaf until it dies.\line  A forth nutrient, Nitrogen is also mobile in plants and while the lower leaves will become entirely yellow, this deficiency is very fast to affect the entire plant by showing a pale green to yellow in all leaves rather than working it's way up slowly.\line  So if you see the lower leaves changing color first.....N, P, K , or Mg are not sufficiently available in the growing medium.\line  Calcium does not translocate from it's position in a plant so older leaves that were sufficiently supplied early on will not show the deficiency.\line  As soluble calcium levels decrease in the planting medium, deficiencies are always first apparent in newer leaves at the tops of branches showing yellow spotting or streaks in the leaves and (or) a general deformed look such as wrinkling or the leaf looks like part of it is missing.\line  As well the fruit will be affected such as blossom end rot in tomatoes and peppers. Sulfur is the final nutrient (outside the micro nutrients) that you may have problems with.\line  It cannot be translocated either so it will always be at the top of your plants first showing a complete yellowing of the leaf (not the veins so much) and without deformity.\line  All of the micro nutrients B, Mn, Mo, Fe, Zn, Cu cannot be translocated so as well, all of these will show at the top of your plants.\line  It is unlikely that you will have these show up deficient very soon ( 3 years of heavy crop growth) unless you are using a completely inert medium as a soil base that has no access to natural soil below, or if you are using a completely water based hydroponic system.\line  Finally, always assume that color changes in your plants are nutrient deficiencies before all else.}
\par \pard\plain \s16\sl288\slmult1\sb0\sa140\sl285\slmult0\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb90\sa0{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
I will be posting this in three parts, next is Absolutes and nutrient relationships, and finally, Preventing and correcting deficiencies.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\widctlpar\hyphpar0\aspalpha\ltrpar\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af8\langfe2052\dbch\af6\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\fs24\lang1033{\afs28\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs28\loch\f4
\line }
\par }